
Lab Setup

You can build your own lab as elaborate as you would like. However,
for the purpose of this class, the following virtual machines (VMs)
will be used.
● WebSploit:​ Kali + Additional Tools + Vulnerable Applications in Docker containers...
● Raven​ : A vulnerable VM that you will use to perform a full assessment (from reconnaissance to full compromise).
● VTCSEC:​ A second vulnerable VM that you will use to perform a full assessment (from reconnaissance to full compromise)



Deploying Your Virtual Machines
You can deploy and configure your VMs using ​ Virtual Box​ , ​ VMWare
Workstation Player​ , ​ VMWare Workstation Pro​ (Windows), ​ VMWare Fusion
(Mac), or ​ vSphere Hypervisor​ (free ESXi server).
You should create a VM-only network (as shown in the previous figure)
to deploy your vulnerable VMs and perform several of the attacks using
WebSploit (Kali Linux).
You can configure a separate network interface in your WebSploit VM to
connect to the rest of your network and subsequently the Internet.
Penetration Testing Linux Distributions
Several Linux distributions package numerous penetration testing
tools. The purpose of these Linux distributions is to make it easier
for individuals to get started with penetration testing, without
having to worry about software dependencies and compatibility issues
that could be introduced when installing and deploying such tools. The
following are the most popular penetration testing Linux
distributions:
Kali Linux
You can download Kali Linux from ​ https://www.kali.org​ . Offensive
Security released a free open source book and course about how to
install, customize, and use Kali Linux. The book and the course can be
accessed at ​ https://kali.training​ .
Parrot Security OS
You can download Parrot from ​ https://www.parrotsec.org​ and access the
documentation at ​ https://docs.parrotsec.org​ .



Black Arch
You can download BlackArch Linux from ​ https://blackarch.org​ and access
the documentation at ​ https://blackarch.org/guide.html​ . BlackArch Linux
source code can be accessed at ​ https://github.com/BlackArch/blackarch​ .









Exercise 1.0: Kali Linux/Parrot OS Top Post Install Customizations and Tips

As per the instructions from Offensive Security ​ here​ , “VMware ​ recommends​ using the
distribution-specific open-vm-tools (OVT) instead of the VMware Tools package for guest
machines. To install open-vm-tools in Kali, first make sure you are fully updated, and then enter
the following:”
apt update && apt -y full-upgrade
#​ Reboot now ​ in​ ​ case​ you have updated to a new kernel. Once rebooted:
apt -y --reinstall install open-vm-tools-desktop fuse
reboot
(Optional) You can refer to the instructions ​ here​ , for adding support for Shared Folders when
using OVT.
Refer to the following link for additional post install tips including:
https://www.offensive-security.com/kali-linux/top-10-post-install-tips
● enabling or disabling the Intelligent Sidebar option
● adding your SSH public key
● installing the NVIDIA drivers if you need them
● disabling the Screen Lock Gnome feature
● adding a non-root User if you’re not comfortable running as root
● keeping the Kali system up to date



